Power system engineering, also known as power engineering, is a specialized area of electrical engineering focused on the generation, transmission, distribution, and utilization of electric power. It involves designing, implementing, and maintaining electrical systems and the equipment connected to them. This field covers a broad range of activities, from power plant design to grid management and the integration of renewable energy sources. 

An electric power system is a network of pieces that combine to process and distribute electrical power. While this can take many forms, the most common are the large networks – sometimes known as “the grid” – that supply communities with electricity. These networks typically contain a source – usually a generator – which creates power that is passed through a transmission system and is delivered to individual homes and businesses through some form of distribution system.

The term “electric power system” is not to be confused with “power electronics,” the latter of which is a more broad – though closely related – concept that describes the study of converting electrical power from one form to another.

These electric systems typically create power through synchronous generators. The stability of these generators is intertwined with their ability to return to what is known as the steady state – or the system’s equilibrium. In electronics, the system must have the ability to return to this equilibrium state without losing synchronism.

The balance of power systems is typically categorized by one of three classifications of stability, the differences of which are particularly significant in scientific research:

Dynamic stability looks at a system’s ability to return to its original state after experiencing continual small disturbances.
Transient stability involves the study of a power system after it has experienced a major disturbance.
Steady state stability is the ability of a system to return to a stable state after a small disturbance has occurred.
It is also important to note that steady state systems’ outputs operate independently of time.

As in much of engineering, the practical application is critical when you work in the field. This typically brings engineers back to the power grids that convert and distribute electricity to the millions of people who live in the U.S.. When such a large amount of energy is being created and distributed through systems, a major challenge you will face is the threat of brownouts or blackouts. A blackout is a complete outage of power in a particular area, while a brownout is a partial reduction in the voltage or capacity of the system, which is only temporary. Brownouts are more common in electrical power systems, but blackouts are the more problematic of the two, as they can lead to significant disruptions.

When you work in the field of electrical engineering, one answer to this threat is the use of security constrained optimal power flow, or SCOPF. This method offers an additional set of parameters that limit some of the conditions at which the system can operate it. Common constraints that you may use include voltage magnitude, voltage stability and angle stability of the power supply. As an electrical engineer, part of your role in the workplace may include assessing these security constraints to determine the most efficient conditions to be used in industrial applications to ensure that electrical power is delivered in the most cost-efficient manner. That may include running hundreds of simulations, looking at worst-case scenarios to guarantee the safety and efficiency of the system.

An alternative to SCOPF is optimal power flow, or OPF. As opposed to SCOPF, which provides additional parameters to ensure security, OPF systems simply offer the best flow for a particular configuration, without taking extra constraints into consideration. It is consequently a simpler system that does not involve making as many assumptions or checking a large number of parameters. However, the system may not be as secure as one that uses SCOPF. As an engineer, you may find yourself in situations in the workplace where you are tasked with determining which option is better for a particular scenario, with respect to the financial concerns of your employer.